Title: System Access & Access Control Policy
Policy Number: CBG-A-P-0002
Department:	Administration
Version #:	001
Author Name:	Bethe Price
Effective Date:	1/1/2020
Approval Name:	Joyce Canning
Approval Date:	10/20/2021
Data Classification:	Class 2 | Internal Only
Regulatory Reference:	ISO 27001 | SSAE 16 SOC 2

1.	Purpose of policy
1.1.	Federal and organizational regulations dictate that organizations need to define and establish adequate controls to restrict access to systems and data.
1.2.	This policy is intended to establish safeguards to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of protected health information (PHI), business and proprietary information within our organization’s systems by controlling access to these systems, applications, and access control to these systems.
2.	Policy scope
2.1.	This policy applies to all staff of CBG or CBG Joint Venture Companies, including but not limited to workforce members, volunteers, contracted providers, business associates, consultants and any other entity provided access to the organization’s information systems.
3.	Policy terms & definitions glossary
3.1.	HIPAA
3.1.1.	Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act.
3.2.	PHI
3.2.1.	Protected Health Information. Information subject to the governing technical controls outline by the HIPAA legislation.
3.3.	PII
3.3.1.	Personally Identifiable Information. Any representation of information that permits the identity of an individual to whom the information applies to be reasonably inferred by either direct or indirect means.
3.4.	Access Control
3.4.1.	The process that limits and controls access to resources of a computer system.
3.5.	Access Privileges
3.5.1.	System permissions associated with an account, including permissions to access or change data, to process transactions, or create and/or change settings.
3.6.	Administrator Account
3.6.1.	User account with privileges that have advanced permissions on an information system that are necessary for the administration of system.
3.6.2.	For example, an administrator account can create new users, change account permissions, modify security settings such as password settings, and modify system logs.
3.7.	Application & Service Accounts
3.7.1.	User accounts that are not associated with a person but an information system, an application (or a specific part of an application) or a network service.
3.8.	Role
3.8.1.	The category or class of person or persons doing a type of job, defined by a set of similar or identical responsibilities.
3.9.	Workforce
3.9.1.	Employees, volunteers (board members, community representatives), trainees (students), interns, contractors, and other persons whose conduct, in the performance of work for the covered entity or business associate, is under the direct control of such covered entity or business associate, whether they are paid by covered entity or business associate.
3.10.	Workstation
3.10.1.	Any electronic computing device, such as a laptop, desktop computer, including virtual desktops, or any other device that performs similar functions, used to create, receive, maintain, or transmit ePHI.
3.10.2.	Workstation devices may include but are not limited to laptop or desktop computers, tablet PCs, other handheld devices, and networking devices.
4.	Policy
4.1.	General
4.1.1.	It is the policy of Cooperative Benefits Group to safeguard the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of protected health information (PHI), business and proprietary information within its information systems by controlling access to these systems/applications.
4.1.2.	Requests for user accounts and access privileges must be formally documented and appropriately approved.
4.1.2.1.	Documentation and approval should occur through Shortcut change management system, or through other approved change management system.
4.1.3.	Requests for special accounts and privileges (such as vendor accounts, application and service accounts, system administration accounts, shared / generic accounts, test accounts and remote access) must be formally documented and approved by the system owner.
4.1.3.1.	Documentation and approval should occur through Shortcut change management system, or through other approved change management system.
4.1.4.	Where possible, CBG will set user accounts to automatically expire at a pre-set date. More specifically:
4.1.4.1.	When temporary access is required, such access will be removed immediately after the user has completed the task for which the access was granted.
4.1.4.2.	User accounts assigned to contractors will be set to expire according to the contract’s expiry date.
4.1.4.3.	User accounts will be disabled after 3 months of inactivity.
4.1.5.	Access rights will be immediately disabled or removed when a user is terminated or ceases to have a legitimate reason to access CBG systems.
4.1.5.1.	A user may be directly employed by CBG, engaged as a consultant, or employed by any entity covered under the general scope of policy.
4.1.6.	A verification of the user’s identity must be performed by the application owners before granting or modifying access.
4.1.7.	All users are responsible for reporting an incident of unauthorized user or access of CBG’s information systems.
4.2.	System Access Audit
4.2.1.	Existing user accounts and access rights will be reviewed at least quarterly to detect dormant accounts and accounts with excessive privileges. Examples of accounts with excessive privileges include:
4.2.1.1.	An active account assigned to external contractors, vendors or employees that no longer work for the Institution.
4.2.1.2.	An active account with access rights for which the user’s role and responsibilities do not require access. For example, users that do not have authority or responsibility to approve expenses should not have access with approval permissions within a financial system.
4.2.1.3.	System administrative rights or permissions (including permissions to change the security settings or performance settings of a system) granted to a user who is not an administrator.
4.2.1.4.	Unknown active accounts.
4.2.2.	The same levels of confidentiality that exist for hard copy PHI, business, and proprietary information apply to digital and/or electronic protected health information (ePHI) within the organization’s information systems and are extended even after termination or other conclusion of access.
4.2.3.	These safeguards have been established to address HIPAA Security regulations.
4.3.	Access Control Requirements
4.3.1.	Access to information systems by all users, including but not limited to workforce members, volunteers, business associates, contracted providers, consultants, and any other entity, is allowable only on a minimum necessary basis.
4.3.1.1.	Need to know – users or resources will be granted access to systems that are necessary to fulfill their roles and responsibilities.
4.3.1.2.	Least privilege – users or resources will be provided with the minimum privileges necessary to fulfill their roles and responsibilities.
4.3.2.	All users must use a unique ID in accordance with CBG-I-P-0001-Unique User Identification policy.
4.3.3.	Passwords must be set in accordance with the CBG-I-P-0002-Passwords & Access Keys policy.
4.3.4.	Alternative authentication mechanisms that do not rely on a unique ID and password must be formally approved.
4.3.5.	Remote access to CBG systems and applications must be in accordance with CBG-I-P-0004-Remote Access policy.
4.3.6.	System and application sessions must automatically lock in accordance with CBG-I-P-0003-Automatic Logoff policy.
4.4.	Exceptions to Policy
4.4.1.	Exceptions to the guiding principles in this policy must be documented and formally approved by the Senior Leadership Team. Policy exceptions must describe:
4.4.1.1.	The nature of the exception, a reasonable explanation for why the policy exception is required, any risks created by the policy exception, and evidence of approval by the Senior Leadership Team.
4.5.	Considerations
4.5.1.	The policy is written from the perspective of a covered entity.
4.5.2.	The term “covered entity” may be replaced by the term “business associate” where appropriate within the policy when a business associate is performing those activities that are associated with the business associate’s requirements under the HIPAA Privacy Rule and Security Rule.
4.5.3.	This includes the changes to the HIPAA Rules introduced in the HIPAA Omnibus Rule released on January 25, 2013.
5.	Policy compliance
5.1.	Compliance to this policy will be verified through various methods, including but not limited to, periodic walk-throughs, digital monitoring, business tool reports, internal and external audits, and feedback to the policy owner.
5.2.	Any exception to the policy must be approved by the Senior Leadership Team in advance.
5.3.	Management and/or administrator(s) are responsible for monitoring and enforcing this policy, in consultation with the Information Security Officer or Compliance Officer.
5.4.	Any employee found to have violated this policy may be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment.
6.	Revision History

Revision Date	Version #	Revision Author	Revision Reason	Approval Name	Notes
1/1/2020	001	Bethe Price	Original
10/20/2021	002	Mark Fowler	Added several segments, clarifications	Joyce Canning	Reviewed document and approve for implementation.

